feat: RFC-9 On-chain validators (#90)
decentraland/adr: RFC/RFC-9-on-chain-validators.md

---
layout: doc
rfc: 9
date: 2022-09-28
title: On-chain validators
authors:
  - imazzara
status: DRAFT
---

# Abstract

Remove the content server's Thegraph dependency and enhance access checkers validators to a more decentralized and immutable approach as part of the Decentraland Protocol.

# Introduction

Remove the usage of subgraphs on behalf of smart contracts to perform validations when deploying entities (access-checkers). This removes the dependency with subgraphs and creates an immutable and decentralized way of validating entity deployments that need to query blockchain information. The content server will still need to use an RPC provider but this RPC is also used nowadays to validate smart contract wallets' deployments.

The final goal is to have a set of different upgradable smart contracts managed by the DAO needed that emulates the subgraphs.

This document also describes a migration approach needed to make profile validations possible.

## Proposed solution

> Subgraphs are being used by the content server to get:

Author: + 1. Will add it

- Scenes
- Collections items
- ThirdParty Wearables
- Ethereum & Polygon block numbers

> - Profiles

Author: But they are happening when the profile is deployed, right?

The following sections will describe how to use only RPC calls and smart contracts to validate deployments by entity type.

### Ethereum & Polygon block numbers

Each entity deployment has a timestamp. We get the block number for that timestamp by using [subgraphs](https://github.com/decentraland/ethereum-blocks) per each chain. It is not possible to get a block number by timestamp directly with only one RPC request because timestamps are just part of the block metadata. In order to remove this dependency, we need extra work:

> - A) Use a [binary search](https://github.com/nachomazzara/eth-block-timestamp) or any other new way to get the closest block for a given timestamp.

Author: @marianogoldman is working on a [custom implementation](https://github.com/decentraland/block-indexer) for this. Not sure how will work

> - B) Start adding block numbers to the deployments. For old deployments, we can create an immutable file with all the blocks per each timestamp used for previous deployments. This file will have a fixed size because new deployments will have the block number directly inside the deployment.

Author: Yes! Every client can get the latest block number. Also for validate the deployment we have the 5 minutes window

### Profiles

- **Entity**: Profile
- **Pointer**: Ethereum Address. E.g: `0x5e5d9d1dfd87e9b8b069b8e5d708db92be5ade99`
- **Contracts**: Decentraland Collections (Ethereum & Polygon). Decentraland Name.
- **Check**: Every profile deployment checks if the address owns the wearables, emotes and Decentaland name.

#### Decentraland Name

The [DCLRegistrar](https://etherscan.io/address/0x2a187453064356c898cae034eaed119e1663acb8) contract has a method to get who is the owner of a specific domain: _`getOwnerOf(subdomain: string)`_.

#### Wearables & Emotes

Each entity has a `wearables` and `emotes` in the property `entity->metadata->avatars`. Wearables are being stored with an array format like `[wearable_urn_1, wearable_item_urn_2, ..., wearable_urn_N]` and Emotes as an array as well but with objects `[{slot: 1, urn: wave}, {slot: 2, urn: emote_item_urn_1}]`.

> Profiles are stored with the item's urn instead of the NFT itself urn. E.g: `urn:decentraland:matic:collections-v2:0x875146d1d26e91c80f25f5966a84b098d3db1fc8:1` (item); `urn:decentraland:matic:collections-v2:0x875146d1d26e91c80f25f5966a84b098d3db1fc8:1:1` (token id/NFT). Checking if a user has a specific item doesn't scale. The ERC721 standard has a method `ownerOf(tokenId: uint256)` to check who is the owner of the NFT. All the profiles are using only item ids instead of the specific NFT. _Remember that NFTs are items kind for Decentraland Collections_. To perform on-chain checks we should perform some changes to how we save profiles and how to validate old profile deployments.

Reviewer: I don't understand why it's needed the `tokenId` without TheGraph, but with TheGraph the `itemId` it's enough. What does the TheGraph different?

Reviewer 2: The NFT entity in the subgraph has an `itemId` field. So I guess we query something like:

```
nfts(where: { owner: "0xuser", itemId: "0" }) { ... }
```

And if that query returns _any_ nft we know you at least own an NFT of that item (it doesn't matter which one particularly since they are all the same).

When querying the contract you can only query ownership of a token `ERC721.ownerOf(tokenId)`, there's no method that translates 1:1 to that query (asking if the users owns any nft of a given item).

Reviewer: Yeah, was wondering what does TheGraph to know that a user owns `some` nft of that `itemId`. I imagine that we could get all the `tokenId`'s for that `itemId` and query `ERC721.ownerOf(tokenId)` for each one, but that doesn't scale right?

Reviewer: Oh okay makes sense now, thanks 👍

> Profiles are stored with the item's urn instead of the NFT itself urn. E.g: `urn:decentraland:matic:collections-v2:0x875146d1d26e91c80f25f5966a84b098d3db1fc8:1` (item); `urn:decentraland:matic:collections-v2:0x875146d1d26e91c80f25f5966a84b098d3db1fc8:1:1` (token id/NFT). Checking if a user has a specific item doesn't scale. The ERC721 standard has a method `ownerOf(tokenId: uint256)` to check who is the owner of the NFT. All the profiles are using only item ids instead of the specific NFT. _Remember that NFTs are items kind for Decentraland Collections_. To perform on-chain checks we should perform some changes to how we save profiles and how to validate old profile deployments.

Reviewer: Profile `emotes` and `wearables` are stored ... ?

> Profiles are stored with the item's urn instead of the NFT itself urn. E.g: `urn:decentraland:matic:collections-v2:0x875146d1d26e91c80f25f5966a84b098d3db1fc8:1` (item); `urn:decentraland:matic:collections-v2:0x875146d1d26e91c80f25f5966a84b098d3db1fc8:1:1` (token id/NFT). Checking if a user has a specific item doesn't scale. The ERC721 standard has a method `ownerOf(tokenId: uint256)` to check who is the owner of the NFT. All the profiles are using only item ids instead of the specific NFT. _Remember that NFTs are items kind for Decentraland Collections_. To perform on-chain checks we should perform some changes to how we save profiles and how to validate old profile deployments.

Author: @pedrotambo and @agusaldasoro. In the profiles, we are storing the item's urn not the NFT urn. The suggestion is not valid. How can I help to remove the confusion?

> Profiles are stored with the item's urn instead of the NFT itself urn. E.g: `urn:decentraland:matic:collections-v2:0x875146d1d26e91c80f25f5966a84b098d3db1fc8:1` (item); `urn:decentraland:matic:collections-v2:0x875146d1d26e91c80f25f5966a84b098d3db1fc8:1:1` (token id/NFT). Checking if a user has a specific item doesn't scale. The ERC721 standard has a method `ownerOf(tokenId: uint256)` to check who is the owner of the NFT. All the profiles are using only item ids instead of the specific NFT. _Remember that NFTs are items kind for Decentraland Collections_. To perform on-chain checks we should perform some changes to how we save profiles and how to validate old profile deployments.

Reviewer 2: Each `Profile` entity stores the `wearables` and `emotes` equipped by the user. Wearables are stored under `entity.metadata.avatar.wearables` as an array of URNs, and Emotes are stored under `entity.metadata.avatar.emotes` as an array of `{ slot: string, urn: string }`. In both cases the URNs used are the **item's** urn, not the **token's** urn. Checking if a user owns a specific item does not scale, since it would require looping within a contract method (users that own too many nfts or collections that are too big could cause this to lag or timeout) or making several RPC calls between the catalyst and the ethereum node (which also would not scale well). We should start storing the **token's** urn within the profiles to make the access checks possible in a single RPC call.

> - Old Profile Deployments: Use the Decentraland Address to signal profile deployments in order to consider them valid without the need to perform further validations.

Reviewer 3: Does this imply re-deploying old profiles with a Decentraland Address? Is there a way to continue validating old profiles the way that it's done today?

Author: I would add something that I forgot which is a disclaimer about this section. We will need another RFC or ADR for this part. IMO we should find a solution where we can avoid re-deploying all the profiles again. We will duplicate the storage used if not.

> - Old Profile Deployments: Use the Decentraland Address to signal profile deployments in order to consider them valid without the need to perform further validations.

Reviewer: Do you mean to "don't check items ownership for `profiles` deployed with DCL address and its timestamp < `ADR_TIMESTAMP_RISED_FROM_THIS_RFC`"?

Author: Exactly!

  - `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v1:{collection-name}:{itemName}`
  - `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v2:{contract(0x[a-fA-F0-9]+)}:{itemId}`
  - `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v1:{contract(0x[a-fA-F0-9]+)}:{itemId}:{tokenId}` -> new
  - `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v1:{collection-name}:{itemName}:{tokenId}` -> new
  - `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v2:{contract(0x[a-fA-F0-9]+)}:{itemId}:{tokenId}` -> new

  The **Explorer** should show the items grouped by item kinds but allow the user to select the specific NFT to add to their profile. Once the users save their profile for the first time once the ADR is running effectively, a process in the client should select the first nft for each item kind saved in the profile. E.g: if the user has this item `urn:decentraland:ethereum:collections-v1:wonderzone_steampunk:steampunk_jacket` selected in their profile but he has 10 of them with the token ids from `1` to `10`, the explorer should select the first (`urn:decentraland:ethereum:collections-v1:wonderzone_steampunk:steampunk_jacket:1`) one and replace it. For off-chain wearables, we should not do any kind of validation.

>   The **Kernel** and the **Catalysts** should accept and return all the NFTs.

Reviewer 3: What does this mean? And on which cases/endpoints?

Author: The lambdas will return the NFTs and not the items anymore. The kernel needs to know that and also @POST new profiles with NFTs and not items.

Reviewer 3: Okay, for that part I think that we should have documented all the necessary changes in the Content and Lambdas APIs, and also a mechanism to release all those breaking changes.

---
layout: doc
rfc: 9
date: 2022-09-28
title: On-chain validators
authors:

>   - imazzara

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - nachomazzara
```
Github user

# Introduction

Remove the usage of subgraphs on behalf of smart contracts to perform validations when deploying entities (access-checkers). This removes the dependency with subgraphs and creates an immutable and decentralized way of validating entity deployments that need to query blockchain information. The content server will still need to use an RPC provider but this RPC is also used nowadays to validate smart contract wallets' deployments.

The final goal is to have a set of different upgradable smart contracts managed by the DAO needed that emulates the subgraphs. The DAO will be in charge of upgrade them in case of any issue or new logic needed.

**Disclaimer: This document also describes migration ideas needed to make profile validations possible. The effort needed for the migration won't be covered. It will require a new RFC or ADR describing the migration proposal.**

## Analysis

Subgraphs are being used by the content server to check the access to:

- LANDs
- Collections items
- ThirdParty Wearables
- Ethereum & Polygon block numbers
- Decentraland Names

> There are two type of deploymenys:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are two type of deployments:
```

- Organic deployments: the timestamp of the entity is now().
- Sync deployments: the timestamp of the entity is in the past. Mostly using when a catalyst boostrap or needs to catch the latest state.

The following sections will describe how to use only RPC calls and smart contracts to validate deployments by entity type.

### Ethereum & Polygon block numbers

Each entity deployment has a timestamp. We get the block number for that timestamp by using [subgraphs](https://github.com/decentraland/ethereum-blocks) per each chain. It is not possible to get a block number by timestamp directly with only one RPC request because timestamps are just part of the block metadata. In order to remove this dependency, we need extra work:

- A) Use a [binary search](https://github.com/nachomazzara/eth-block-timestamp) or any other new way to get the closest block for a given timestamp.

> - B) Start adding block numbers to the deployments. For old deployments, we can create an immutable file with all the blocks per each timestamp used for previous deployments. This file will have a fixed size because new deployments will have the block number directly inside the deployment. The client can get the latest block number. The content server will keep using the 5 minutes window for validate deployments.

Reviewer 4: I think this is un-viable

#### Wearables & Emotes

Each Profile entity stores the wearables and emotes equipped by the user. Wearables are stored under `entity.metadata.avatar.wearables` as an array of items' URNs, and Emotes are stored under `entity.metadata.avatar.emotes` as an array of { slot: string, urn: string }. In both cases, the URNs used are the item's urn, not the token's urn. Checking if a user owns a specific item does not scale, since it would require looping within a contract method. Users that own too many NFTs or collections that are too big could cause this to lag or timeout. Another alternative could be making several RPC calls between the catalyst and the Ethereum nodes, which also would not scale well. We should start storing the token's urn within the profiles to make the access checks possible in a single RPC call. The ERC721 standard has a method `ownerOf(tokenId: uint256)` which serves to get the owner of the NFT.

This document will propose two ideas on how the old profiles can be migrated but an new RFC or ADR should be needed describing the final approach.

> - ##### Alternative 1

Reviewer 4: item list -> header
```suggestion
##### Alternative 1
```

  Use the Decentraland Address to signal profile deployments in order to consider them valid without the need to perform further validations. It can be a new field to the profiles schema to avoid re-deploying the profiles by the Decentraland address which can duplicate the storage. If duplicating the profiles is the only alternative, then old ones can be removed.

> - ##### Alternative 2

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
##### Alternative 2
```

  Build a [Merkle tree with every profile hash](https://github.com/decentraland/content-hash-tree) and submit the root to a smart contract. A static file must be added to the repository with all the proofs needed to check if a deployment is part of the tree. The file with the proofs may weight [~100MB for 1M of profiles](https://github.com/decentraland/content-hash-tree#generate-a-tree-with-content-hashes).

For new profiles, a new ADR with a date to make it effective to start receiving profiles with an extended urn with the token id at the end. This implies changes in the Explorer, Kernel, Catalysts, and URN Resolver. New urn resolvers

- `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v1:{contract(0x[a-fA-F0-9]+)}:{itemName}`
- `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v1:{collection-name}:{itemName}`
- `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v2:{contract(0x[a-fA-F0-9]+)}:{itemId}`
- `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v1:{contract(0x[a-fA-F0-9]+)}:{itemId}:{tokenId}` -> new
- `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v1:{collection-name}:{itemName}:{tokenId}` -> new

> - `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v2:{contract(0x[a-fA-F0-9]+)}:{itemId}:{tokenId}` -> new

Reviewer: One question here, is the next right?
- `decentraland......{itemId}:{tokenId}` <- urns for items in profiles
- `decentraland......{itemId}` <- urns for the item saved in the content-server?

Author: > `decentraland......{itemId}:{tokenId}` <- urns for items in profiles

urns for NFTs in profile

> decentraland......{itemId} <- urns for the item saved in the content-server?
urns for the item, used when a creator deploys an update to the wearable or emote.

Reviewer: 👍

- If the deployer is the `owner` of the Estate.
- If the deployer has `operator` rights for the Estate.
- If the deployer has `approvalForAll` rights for the Estate.
- If the deployer has `updateOperator` rights for the Estate.
- If the deployer has `updateManager` rights for the Estate.

If **any** of the above checks is valid, the deployment is valid.

### Ethereum Items

- **Entity**: Wearable
- **Pointer**: `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v1:{contract(0x[a-fA-F0-9]+)}:{itemName}` (Item URN)
- **Contracts**: Ethereum Decentraland Collections
- **Check**: Off-chain check. The only signer allowed to deploy Ethereum wearables is the Decentraland Address. Decentraland is not creating more collections in Ethereum. The ones created are considered **legacy** and the addresses are known beforehand. A list of those addresses can be used to check if the collection address is valid.

### Polygon Items: Wearables & Emotes

- **Entity**: Wearable & Emote
- **Pointer**: `decentraland:{protocol}:collections-v2:{contract(0x[a-fA-F0-9]+)}:{itemId}` (Item URN)
- **Contracts**: Polygon Decentraland Collections

> - **Check**: Each collection in Polygon is created by a collection factory. The addresses of the factories are known in advance. For the time of this RFC, Decentraland has only two collection factories. The information needed to perfom the validity of the deployment is the contract address and the item id which should be extracted from the urn, and the content hash and the signer of the deployment. The on-chain validations needed are:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **Check**: Each collection in Polygon is created by a collection factory. The addresses of the factories are known in advance. At the time of this RFC, Decentraland has only two collection factories. The information needed to check the validity of the deployment is the contract address and the item id which should be extracted from the urn, and the content hash and the signer of the deployment. The on-chain validations needed are:
```
